All right, moving along now to civilizations of the middle horizon. We're going to talk briefly about Wari and Tiwanaku Empires. So during the Middle Horizon, which lasts from about about A.D. 600 to 1000, much of Andean South America was incorporated in two large political domains. One of these was the Wari empire, which was a militaristic state that encompasses much of what is today Peru. So Wari empire. The other was the Tiwanaku empire with its capital at the city of Tiwanaku near the shore of the high altitude Lake Titicaca on the border between Peru and Bolivia. This city center of Tiwanaku lies at an elevation of almost 13,000 feet above sea level, making it one of the highest elevation urban centers anywhere in the world. We'll spend a minute just talking about Tiwanaku. Here's an here's an early historic photograph of what the site looked like. At the center of the city of Tiwanaku, there is a complex monumental religious architecture, including an elevated platform called the Kalasasaya. And this is what you're seeing here. My understanding is this has largely been reconstructed. So this may not be exactly what it looked like in antiquity, but gives you a sense of the monumentality of this site and more importantly, for our purposes, is this enormous carved stone gateway part of this complex called the gateway of the sun. And here I want to draw your attention, given some of the discussions we've had already, to the figure above the portal, which would have been part of the monumental architectural landscape in this ceremonial complex at Tiwanaku. So here's a drawing of the carved figure above the door. You should recognize this at this point. It's a figure holding two staffs. The staffs have condor heads. This certainly evokes the earlier staff god that we saw in art from Cavin and other examples from Paracas and so forth. This also looks forward to the Inca deity, Viracocha. And I'll just point out here, some of these features that we've talked about already. The sun's rays are arranged around the head. Here we see the tears and then the lightning bolts staffs suggesting this connection with sunshine, rain, moisture, storms, and so forth. So certain elements of the Tiwanaku state foreshadow later Inca developments. Tiwanaku establish far flung colonies on the Pacific coast on the one hand, in the desert coast, and in tropical areas to the east, in the Montana region, obtaining things like sea shell, obsidian, warm water plants, and animal resources that weren't available locally, things like maize and coca. Trade goods were carried to and from these regions by means of caravans. And later, the Inca would establish a similar trade network linking together these different mosaic environments. Although Tiwanaku declined shortly after A.D. 1000, it's powerful iconography and monumental architecture we're evoked centuries later by Inca rulers who claimed descent from the Lake Titicaca region and referenced Tiwanaku as a source of power. This is similar to what we saw in the case of Mesoamerica, where Aztec rulers would make pilgrimages back to Teotihuacan, a very ancient power center. The point is, in these complex political landscapes, the past is powerful and reference to either a real or imagined past is a powerful and evocative political tool that we see being used in many of these complex societies, including the Aztec and the Inca. All right, so moving on to civilizations of the late intermediate period, in this period, the Andean landscape was again divided up among smaller competing states. One of these, the Chimű empire, was centered on the city of Chan Chan at the mouth of the Moche river. So this is a later civilization in the Moche river valley. The layout of Chan Chan is rather unique, and its layout architecturally may provide clues to the political organization of the state. The city center in particular is dominated by these 10 large adobe walled compounds called ciudadelas or little cities. These compounds have a large interior courtyard, numerous store rooms, residential spaces, elite residential spaces, and also a burial platform. Each of these is believed to have been a royal residence. Probably for each of the 10 documented, historically documented, Chimű kings or the mythologically documented Chimű kings. Each of these structures also at the end of its use when the ruler died, apparently became a mausoleum. In other words, the ruler was interred in this compound after they died. These were presumably maintained after the king's death by their descendants as a form of ancestor veneration. This is a widespread practice in the Andes. Later, we'll see it's a key feature of Inca statecraft. There's also evidence here for the practice of split inheritance. This is a system in which the successor to the throne did not inherit the dead ruler's property. So if you become king, you suddenly have to raise your own source of wealth. And we believe this was accomplished in part through a labor tax, much like we saw in the Moche and as we'll see later in the Inca, this requirement of subjects under the rulership of of the ruler to contribute labor and perhaps material goods as well. So Chimu kings may have employed such a labor tax to raise their ciudadela once they had ascended to the rulership of the empire, to construct massive irrigation systems that we see fed to the city's agricultural fields. And again, this may be foreshadowing systems used not very long after by the Inca. The Inca, we'll see Inca statecraft to some extent, is a piecing together of tools, political tools developed over centuries by other Andean state societies. In the mid A.D. 1400s, the Chimu began to butt heads with the Inca, an outside population. And within a decade, the Chimű in part was actually incorporated into the emerging Inca empire. The incorporation of the Chimű lands, as we see here, was facilitated by a preexisting road system which the Inca could simply link into their own road network. So in this way, they were able to, the Inca were able to relatively easily incorporate this larger domain into their already growing empire by just linking into the existing road system. So we'll see the Inca put together an empire not necessarily from scratch, but by tying together pieces that were already in place. All right, so just to review briefly, and I know I'm going a little bit fast here because I want to get all of this in in this last lecture segment. Just to review where we've been to this point. We've looked at very early periods of Andean prehistory briefly. And then we looked at the early horizon, the early intermediate period, the middle Horizon, the late intermediate period, and now we're moving onto the late horizon, which is synonymous with the Inca empire. So we're going to spend the rest of the lecture talking about the Inca and the Inca empire. So the Inca empire is known as Tawantinsuyu or land the Four Corners. You can see it's divided into four administrative provinces in this colored map. That's what that Land of the Four Corners refers to. The Inca empire covered an area of approximately three hundred eighty thousand square miles and would have included roughly 12 million people in this domain. It was pieced together through conquest, in part through state craft and other political strategies, eventually incorporating millions of people of diverse ethnic backgrounds and cultures under this one rule. And some of the strategies the Inca used to maintain this political hegemony over such a diversity of people are really interesting and instructive. The ruler of this domain was referred to as Sapa Inca or Great Inca and was considered to be the son of Inti, The son god. In many depictions of the Inca ruler like these, you will see them pointing to the sun, right, reminding you that they are the son of the sun god. This is another appeal to divine origin for validating rulership. Much like we saw in the Maya region where the Maya tracked their right to rule to the gods themselves or ancient Egypt, ancient Rome. This is a very common strategy across state societies. One particular Inca ruler that I would like you to be familiar with is Pachakuti. It was Pachakuti who actually established the Inca empire through a series of successful military campaigns in the A.D. 1400s. We'll have reason to mention Pachakuti again subsequently. All right, so I'm going to lead you through a series of archeological sites here relating to the Inca. And then we'll touch on a number of other topics as we as we go through these different archeological sites. So ancient Cuzco was the Inca capital. This is a photograph of this Sacsayhuaman Fortress or a portion of it in the hills overlooking modern day Cuzco. So this is the Inca architecture in the foreground. And of course, you can see modern day Cuzco down here in in the background. Cuzco has many public buildings and elite residences, made of finely crafted Inca stone masonry. Inca are renowned for their stone masonry and their stonework has some really unique aspects to it. Generally, the stones for Inca stonemasonry were cut into shape with such precision and the joints were fitted so closely between stones that typically no mortar was needed or used to hold these walls together. So this is dry laid masonry. These blocks are just sitting one on top of the other. But as you can see, they they almost lock into place because of the idiosyncratic nature of the joints and the precision. So some very typical features of Inca stone masonry. Stones are generally variable in size and shape. We'll see some examples later on where they're they're more uniform, but they can't be highly variable in size and shape, sometimes massively large. And you can see there's no scale here, but that the central stone that has many, many different sides to it is also very, very large. And then the stones of different shapes and sizes surrounding it. Stones are very precisely shaped. No mortar is necessary. The exterior faces are left plain, so no designs carved into the exteriors of these. They are smoothed through a process of of picking the faces, but there's no design in them. And they really knew what they were doing. This is very high quality workmanship. Many of these walls are still standing and have resisted centuries of of the elements and in human intervention and so forth and are still very much intact. It is a testament to the original builders. And you can see there's almost a playfulness to it and an artistry. You know, they could have made all of these just square blocks, but they chose to impose this unique geometry on them. And in part, this is helping, like I said, lock the pieces together and keep them in place. Now, this is what you would find on elite residences, government buildings, religious buildings. Commoner residences in Cuzco and other parts of the empire, in contrast, would have been made of plain stone and adobe. You wouldn't see this level of precision in the stone work in everyday houses. Right. So this is for special buildings. Here's some more images of the Sacsayhuaman fortress. Again, this was a large military installation, today an archaeological site on a hill above Cuzco and provides a really nice illustration of this Inca stonemasonry as you can see in these photographs. Another building associated with Inca Cuzco is the Temple of the Sun or or the Qoricancha, which means Golden Courtyard. This was a temple dedicated to the god Inti, again the sun God, and was built by Pacakuti at the center of Cuzco. This was actually the most important Inca ritual building in the city. It was lavished with gold ornamentation. And we know that mummies of former rulers and their spouses were kept in this temple Qoricancha. Today, the base of the temple is still visible, as you can see in this photograph. On top of the base of the temple is a church church of Santo Domingo. So the temple was partly leveled in the European conquest of Cuzco. And then this church architecture built directly on top of it. This should remind you of something we talked about previously when we talked about Tenochtitlan in the temple of Huitzilopochtli, and the early Spanish colonial church that was then built using the stones from the temple of Huitzilopochtli, that had been on top of the temple of Mayor. We talked about this idea of transformation of indigenous religious spaces as a conquest process. This is a a process of dismantling and replacing the indigenous religious system by that of the European colonists. Right. And we see this in many different world contexts, pointing out the example in Mexico City. Here's another example. The Southwest where I work, we find examples of this where mission churches have been placed directly on top of, for example, Pueblo religious architecture. This is a very common pattern in different world regions where this colonial encounter happened. And I would refer to this particular example as a case of ritual superposition, Which means a later ceremonial structure built on top of an earlier one. Essentially as an act of conquest and as an active replacement. Now, this is very different from the process of entombment that we saw, for example, in Maya temples, where a later temple is built over an encompassing the earlier temple. This is more of a, you know, replacement behavior that we're seeing here where the the original indigenous temple is leveled to its foundations. And then a new building is built right on top of that as this very symbolic act of replacement. And even coopting the importance of this place in the landscape, you know. It's saying we know this is an important place, and now, you know, we're putting this this new structure in its in its location. When you begin looking for these kinds of processes, when you're keyed into these kinds of colonial conquest processes, you'll start seeing this in architecture and in different world regions. And this is a an excellent example of. So Cuzco functions were mainly administrative. It was not exactly a commercial center. There's no large marketplace like we saw in Tlatelolco, the sister city of Tenochtitlan in the Aztec empire. There are state storehouses, though, at Cuzco where the government kept goods it received as taxes. So Inca government included an elaborate state bureaucracy with systems of taxation and record keeping. One of the devices that was used in record keeping is called the Quipo. Quipo is the term for an elaborate ordered string device that was used by the Inca for keeping records. So the Inca had no writing system in a traditional sense. And this is one of the truly amazing thing about the Inca empire is unlike those Mesoamericas civilizations, they had no indigenous writing system. And yet all of this was still possible. They did have these record keeping devices, though, such as the Quipo. Now, the system used here has not been entirely deciphered, but basically knots on these strings record information in a base 10 counting system. You could also include non-numerical information. Sometimes we see different colors of string, which may be recording non-numerical kinds of information. So state officials would have used these kinds of devices for keeping track of state business. They might record, for example, the inventory of a warehouse where they might record the collection of tribute from, you know, outlying groups of people using these devices. And then it would essentially be a read-only device to record the information once you make the knots. And you you don't change it. Right. So a a permanent record. There's some evidence that this kind of device was once used fairly widely over a larger area of South and Central America than than just the Inca empire. There's different kinds of devices like this. And as I said, we haven't exactly deciphered all the ins and outs of the Inca system yet. So the Inca government itself, played a central role in collection and redistribution of goods, including craft goods, and so consequently, private trade occurred at a fairly low level in the Inca empire. Unlike some of the other state societies we've looked at. So whereas markets were more important in Mesoamerica, large scale storage facilities and centralized state redistribution played more of an important role in the Inca empire. The Inca state would collect different kinds of materials as tribute, so different kinds of goods and resources, they would collect them in warehouses and then redistribute redistribute them to different parts of the empire, different populations as needed. So, for example, there are early Spanish accounts that report warehouses filled with weapons, filled with sandals, filled with clothing, filled with food and so forth, that the government stockpiled and then redistributed back outward to different populations. So consequently, private trade, like we see it in other contexts, was was less important in the Inca empire is a different kind of economy. As mentioned a couple of times earlier, the Inca also implemented a system of non-voluntary labor tribute. This is called Mit'a. This was used to construct, to complete construction tasks and other state sponsored projects. So under Inca rulership, you would owe the central Inca government a certain amount of time and Labor, you know, on a I guess, annual basis and would have to contribute some labor to these state projects. So moving on to another archeological site that I want you to know about, you've probably heard of the site of Machu Picchu. This is perhaps the most famous Inca site and one of the most famous archeological sites anywhere in the world. Machu Picchu was a royal Inca estate. It was built by Patchakuti and it was used by his heirs. This is a site situated in a high saddle between two mountains. It's located on the Urubamba River. This is quite an inaccessible site. It's not, you know, down in the valley, it's not somewhere that you can easily get to. It's up in this mountain, mountain saddle area and was fairly well hidden. We have reason to believe that it remained hidden to Europeans until the early 20th century. There's evidence that Spanish conquistadors actually didn't know about the existence of this site. And I'll show you archaeological evidence in a minute that early Spaniards never actually visited Machu Picchu. In fact, this site only came to the attention of the outside world in the early nineteen hundreds. Through the efforts of an explorer named Hiram Bingham. I don't have a lot to say about Hiram Bingham except to point out that he was one of the models providing inspiration for the Indiana Jones character in the movie. You can perhaps get a sense of that from his attire and attitude in these photographs. So Machu Picchu was defensible. It is up in this high mountain saddle, but it's not, strictly speaking, a military installation. It is more like a seasonal residence for Pachakuti and his family. The seat of government in the off season, so to speak. It contains primarily elaborate residences for these elite individuals when they stayed here on a seasonal basis. As you can see, it's a beautiful location. The site is set in this very high altitude context among mountain peaks. And to some extent, this reflects the importance of importance of these elements in Inca religion. Mountains in particular. And there are many ritual features at the site. One of the most important of these ritual features at Machu Picchu is this stone pillar. This is actually a fairly small stone pillar referred to as the Intihuatana, which means hitchingpost to the sun. We don't fully understand how these features were used, but we know that they were an important component of Inca religion. This term, hitchingpost to the sun, one of the symbolic functions of these objects was as a a point to which the sun was tethered. If you imagine, you know, an imaginary string connecting the sun to this pillar, the pillar was what kept the sun on its correct annual course. It's what kept it in the correct location, in the sky, on the equinox and on the solstice, for example. Right. And so it pertains in some sense to maintaining the continual natural order of things, to maintaining, you know, everything that that the sun brings again to an agricultural people. We know these were very important, though, in Inca religion, although we don't fully understand how they were used. We know they were important because they were almost invariably destroyed by Spanish invaders as part of the conquest because of their association with with native religion. All right. So this is the bit of information I was mentioning as evidence that Machu Picchu was never visited by Europeans, at least in the conquest period, the Intihuatana at Machu Picchu is intact. As you can see here, the pillar itself is is not broken. It's complete, suggesting that, you know, this was never actually discovered by by early Europeans or it would have been destroyed is the is the implication. So the Inca empire was tied together by an extensive road network which served as a conduit for commerce, for communication. And the Inca actually linked the road systems of conquered peoples into their own, such as the Chimu mentioned a little bit earlier, creating this large network of roads that criss crossed the Andes. Altogether, the Inca road system made up more than 25,000 miles. All right. And you can see remains of some of these roads. They're more formal in some areas than others with pavement and so forth. You can see segments of these roads today. The Inca were also renowned for their bridges, particularly suspension bridges. Now, these are replicas. Obviously, these are not bridges that have survived since Inca times because they're they're primarily made a fiber. But part of the Inca road system would have been the suspension bridges that cross over the not infrequent chasms that you run into when you're crossing this this Andean landscape. And although this looks complicated, I've watched a movie called Secrets of Lost Empires, Inca, where they do an experiment replicating one of these bridges. They have a local population harvest grasses, it's essentially made out of grass. And over the course of I want to say something like three days, it was a very short period of time, they showed people, you know, winding the grasses into string and then winding the string into larger cords and creating the cables that that support the bridge. And it was amazing how fast when you have the know how how fast something like this could be constructed. Right. And that it was stable enough for both people and llamas to to cross it. So in a highly dissected landscape like that of the Inca, with all of these chasms, this would have been an important component of the road system. Inca roads were used primarily for official state business, so this would have been these road systems would have been used by government messengers, by armies, by trade caravans and so forth. That was their primary primary function. The roads also serve to interconnect this vast mosaic of environments and resources that you find in the Andes. Right. So the road systems, in effect, link together those different environments that we talked about, making it possible to bring goods from all over the place, resources from all over the place into areas occupied by by people. Inca even had teams of relay runners that facilitated rapid transmission of messages from one end of the empire to the other because there was no writing system. You know, they needed messengers to to actually, you know, go from one place to another with with a message verbally. And the way this was done quickly was through teams of relay runners. It's almost like a, you know, an ancient form of of email, where it's moving very rapidly. Inca also built structures called Tampus. These are roadside lodging depots and supply depots. They're basically inns or motels with with place to get supplies and food and so forth. These were built at intervals along the road, generally about one day's walk apart. So, you know, if you're a government official or a military unit traveling down the road, you know, you know, at the end of a day's march, there's going to be one of these supply depots. And the Inca did have a large, effective fighting force. It was well supplied by by this road network. Ironically, though, in the conquest, Spanish conquistadors also made very efficient use of the Inca road system and raided these camps to resupply their own food stores. Right. So an interesting thing from a strategic point of view. We've seen how roads and and the supply depots are really important for linking different areas of these large state level societies together. But the road systems can also be an Achilles heel. We saw how the Inca very effectively used the Tampu road system to incorporate that domain into their own and then subsequently the Spanish conquistadors using the Inca road system itself to effect the conquest in the fifteen hundreds. All right. An additional one additional archeaological site I want to mention to you is a site called Huánuco Pampa. This is an Inca provincial administrative center north of Cuzco. So this is outside of the immediate environs of Cuzco. This is in one of the provinces that had been brought under control. This site had an enormous central plaza with a large stone platform at its center. This is the stone platform here. We'll talk about the functions of that momentarily. And here's a map of the site. So large, open air plaza for public events. Here's a stone platform and then buildings ringing the plaza. The functions of Huanuco Pampa were mainly administrative. But there is evidence for state control of cloth production at the site. We know there was cloth production happening because we find some of the technology that's used in the production of cloth. And we believe that it was state controlled because most of that evidence is found in these structures right around the Central Plaza area. In other words, in the area that's most closely associated with governmental functions at at the site. So how do we know they were producing textiles, were producing fibers at all? This is an interesting conundrum because sometimes in in very dry environments, you will find textiles themselves. But often even in places like Peru, in many archeological contexts, the textiles themselves do not survive. If you get lucky and you're in the desert coast region or very high altitude textiles will survive. But in other contexts, they do decay. Just because the sites are exposed to, you know, the usual range of of natural elements. And yet we know, you know, textiles were very important in these societies, economically and socially. So how do we see evidence for this archeologically? I've run into the same problem in the Southwest. We know the societies where I work that prehistorically they were producing textiles and textiles were really important in those political and economic systems. But only rarely do you find evidence for the archaeologically. So how do we say anything archeologically about this kind of a production? The trick is finding those elements of the technology that don't decay. And in weaving, there's a couple of different elements that are usually made out of nonperishable materials that can give us clues that people are weaving textiles. In the southwest, there certain features that you find in the floor that indicate there was a loom and upright loom. Another bit of evidence is something called the spindle whorl. We find these in the southwest. They find them in the Andes. And this is actually the main source of evidence at Huanuco Pampa. So a spindle whorl is this kind of disc shaped device. They can either be made purposely out of ceramic or out of stone. Very often people reuse broken pottery. So if a pot breaks, they will shape a piece of the broken pot into a disc and pierce it with a hole and reuse it as a spindle world. We find those very, very commonly in the southwest. This one looks like it was made purposely as a spindle whorl. In any event, there are these very easily recognizable discs made out of stone or ceramic with a hole in the middle. And what they do is they serve as a weight. So as you're you're turning the raw fiber into thread for use in weaving, the spindle whorl serves to provide balance and weight as you're spinning the thread. I'm stumbling over my words because I don't know exactly how thread is spun. And so I am missing some of the technological jargon here. But it's this letter C here in the diagram. It's on the base of the ball of thread that's being spun and it's a critical component of this technology. So they would find spindle whorls in some of these structures and concentrated in these areas around the plaza, suggesting state control of textile production. And we know that cloth had great social significance in the Andes. Textiles were exchanged during all kinds of life rituals, such as marriage celebrations and during major political events. These were important both economically and socially. So the Inca state control of textile production, therefore, would have provided the government with a major source of capital. It could have used this as a source of income for raising armies, paying workers and and so forth. Right. So this is one of the kinds of craft items that would have been under state control, providing a source of political capital to speak. There is also evidence at Huanaca Pampa for large storage vessels used in the production of chicha. Chicha is maize beer, an alcoholic beverage. We believe chicha may have been distributed to the local population during state sponsored feasts and public ceremonies in that central plaza. All right. So this is an outlying population that was brought under Inca control. Inca government occasionally would sponsor these feasts, basically to keep the population happy, to make it seem like this was a benevolent arrangement. You know, this new administration they were under would provide for them occasionally. And so such feasts perhaps centered on, you know, this large structure in in the plaza may have been used to promote loyalty of these local peoples to the Inca state. So we know, like Inca brought outlying populations into the empire through conquest. Yes. But also through diplomacy and through, you know, subtle manipulations of ideology. Generally, the Inca only modified a region's local pre-Inca government if it was fragmentary or if there was resistance to Inca rule. Their first choice was to simply leave the existing government administration in place while ultimately controlling it from afar, but but not messing with it too much as long as things were were running fairly smoothly. They did use a system of colonization, though, called Mitmaq to suppress provincial rebellions. This was a system where they would move groups of people from one part of the empire to another to break up dissident groups. So if there was a, you know, local population that was causing problems, they would pick them up and move them ostensibly someplace closer to the center where they could more easily control them and keep an eye on them. This is also a strategy used in other state societies. So, for example, we see instances of this kind of movement of dissident populations in the Roman Empire. A number of years ago, I was able to get my great grandfather's birth certificate and find out actually where he was born. And he was born in a little town outside Naples in southern Italy. And I did some research into the history of this small town that he was born in. And the town actually went back to Roman times and it was established as one of these dissident colonies. So the people who founded that small town were actually from further north on on the Adriatic coast of Italy. They were apparently not cooperating with Roman administration and so they were forcibly picked up and moved closer to Rome so that they could be kept more, more in line. I thought that was really interesting as a bit of historical information about the origins of this this small town where my grandfather, great grandfather was was from. In any event, it's a fairly widespread process in these state societies. So at the time of contact, Just to wrap up this section, in A.D. 1532, the Spaniards who arrived in the Inca empire entered a very complex political landscape. At the time there is an internal power struggle between two brothers over the rulership of the Inca empire. And conquistadors under Pizarro fairly quickly toppled the Inca empire, it fell in 1533 with the help of native dissidents. So much as we saw in the fall of the Aztec empire where Tlaxcalans were were part of the reason the Spaniards were so readily able to overthrow the local indigenous government. Here in fact, the Europeans captured, ransomed, and ultimately murdered the last Inca ruler named Atahualpa. At this point, though, we also have to remember the Inca empire had been weakened by internal political strife and their population had already been decimated by European diseases. Smallpox, which had been introduced in Mexico earlier and which had, we believe, spread to South America even before European peoples themselves. Remember, the indigenous populations of the Americas had no innate immunity to these longstanding crowd diseases of Europe like smallpox. And those diseases, when they spread through these indigenous populations, just had a devastating effect. And the Inca had already been weakened by the impact of that. All right. So I'm going to wrap up our discussion of the Inca with that and just make a few very brief comments here by way of conclusion, because I see where we're quickly running out of time here. So we've looked at two parallel case studies in the development of state level societies, states and empires in ancient Mesoamerica and in ancient Andean South America. And, you know, I think when we look at these, we can see some similarities and some differences. And really, I would like you to think about what those similarities and differences are. How are these trajectories that we've seen in these two regions similar? Well, they're both based on, to some extent, agricultural production, which makes the production of surplus possible and through surplus and control of surplus, we can see the emergence of stratification, use of surplus as a form of political capital. Right. We've talked about these processes already extensively. So I'm not going to go into it now. But we see those kinds of processes at work in both of these regions. Right. The use of domesticates and the capacity for surplus production is one of the necessary factors in both of these areas. Now, how that played out is different in Mesoamerica and in South America. In Mesoamerica, we saw maize was kind of the main important agricultural crop. In Andean South America maize is important, but it's not the only story. Potatoes and other domesticates are important. And also in Mesoamerica, pastoralism use of domestic animals was which much more important. We've also seen differences in the economies in in different Mesoamerican and Andean societies. In some cases we have seen things that look like market economies where goods are essentially bought and sold or traded for for equivalence in Mesoamerica. We saw that in Andean South America that we saw, particularly in in the Inca case, more of a centralized collection of goods and resources and then redistribution. And we saw different forms of rulership in these different societies. In some cases, the personality and the person of the ruler was an important component. Who they were was significant in the cases of charismatic leaders like the Maya rulers. In other cases, the rulers seemed to be more faceless bureaucrats, essentially, as we saw perhaps in Teotihuacan. And various other shades of nuance between those two extremes. So those are the main points I wanted to get across. Again, I would encourage you to think about what what the similarities and differences are between these two different areas that we've talked about. I'm going to wrap up with that. I don't want to keep you any longer than I have already because I know you all need to get studying for the exam. So I'm going to end this video here. If there's time, I will make another short video that kind of wraps up the entire course that won't be on the exam. But just to, you know, to bring some closure to the topics we've discussed. So study hard, everybody. Good luck on on the exam. And I will try to do a live session some time in the coming week. If you have questions and you can always feel free to email me. 